---
layout: post
title: "Charles R. Drew, Blood Banking, and the Research Software Engineering Behind Medical Informatics"
tags: [dei, black-history]
author: Cordero Core
---

US-RSE's [DEI working group (DEI-WG)](https://us-rse.org/wg/dei/) is proud to
help US-RSE celebrate and participate in Black History Month. Each week during
Black History Month, the US-RSE will spotlight Black/African Americans who have
been involved in computing, science, engineering, and/or math, and have
inspired our members through their accomplishments in their careers and their
personal stories.

[*Originally posted on
Medium*](https://medium.com/@cdcore/charles-r-drew-blood-banking-and-the-research-software-engineering-behind-medical-informatics-28f51fdf0f1e)

![Photo of Charles R. Drew]({{ site.baseurl
}}/assets/img/post-2025-02-25/0_Wbe4dF_qMfsMZAGw.jpg "Photo of Charles R.
Drew"){: style="display: block; margin: auto; max-width: 600px;" }

In the 1940s, **Dr. Charles R. Drew** revolutionized modern medicine with his
pioneering work in **blood banking and transfusion medicine**. His research on
**plasma preservation and large-scale blood storage** laid the foundation for
the blood donation systems we rely on today. More than a scientific
breakthrough, Drew's work was a testament to **systems thinking, data
management, and logistical precision**—the same principles that underpin modern
**medical informatics** and the infrastructure of healthcare today.  

Just as Drew developed methods to **scale the storage and distribution of
blood**, research software engineers (**RSEs**) today build **scalable software
systems for medical data management**. Whether working on **electronic health
records (EHRs), blood tracking systems, or computational models in medicine**,
RSEs play a critical role in ensuring that **data flows seamlessly, securely,
and accurately**—just as Drew ensured that blood could move efficiently from
donor to patient.  

His legacy is more than just medical—it is computational, logistical, and
deeply human.  

---

## **From Blood to Data: The Need for Scalable Infrastructure**  

Dr. Drew's research came at a time when **blood transfusions were lifesaving
but inefficient**. Prior to his innovations, there was no standardized system
for collecting, preserving, and distributing blood on a large scale. His
    meticulous work led to the creation of **plasma separation and storage
    techniques**, allowing for **longer shelf life and broader
    distribution**—critical for saving lives during World War II.  

![Image of Charles R. Drew in a lab coat next to a photo of many blood storage
bags in a blood bank.]({{ site.baseurl
}}/assets/img/post-2025-02-25/0_DZ72MWYJIu5j7fHz.jpg "Charles R. Drew made
significant pioneered modern day blood bank storage and standardization.")
{:style="display: block; margin: auto; max-width: 600px;" }

The challenge Drew tackled—**scaling a life-saving resource across large
populations**—is one that **research software engineers** continue to solve
today. In modern healthcare, **data** is as critical as blood, and managing it
requires similarly robust **logistical and computational infrastructure**.  

- **Blood Banking & Data Storage:** Just as Drew developed **storage protocols
  for blood**, RSEs develop **secure, scalable data storage solutions for
      patient records and medical research**.  
- **Efficient Distribution & Data Pipelines:** Drew optimized **the movement of
  blood across hospitals and battlefields**—RSEs design **data pipelines that
  allow hospitals, researchers, and clinics to share critical patient
  information** in real-time.  
- **Standardization & Interoperability:** Drew's standardized plasma storage
  methods are mirrored in **modern medical informatics, where RSEs work to
  ensure that health data formats (HL7, FHIR, etc.) are interoperable across
  systems**.  

Like Drew's blood banks, today's **medical informatics systems must be
scalable, reliable, and life-saving**.  

---

## **Building the Digital Blood Bank: Research Software Engineering in Medicine**  

Imagine a hospital system without **electronic health records (EHRs)** or
**blood donation databases**. Without RSEs, the **complex software
infrastructure** behind modern medicine would not function.  

- **Blood Donation Software:** RSEs build and maintain systems that track
  **donors, blood type compatibility, storage conditions, and distribution
  needs** across vast healthcare networks.  
- **Medical Informatics & Machine Learning:** AI-driven models help predict
  **blood shortages, optimize donation schedules, and detect anomalies in
  transfusion data**—all powered by research software.  
- **Real-Time Data Sharing:** Systems like **FHIR (Fast Healthcare
  Interoperability Resources)** enable hospitals and blood banks to share data
  securely, ensuring **faster response times and better patient outcomes**.  

Dr. Drew laid the groundwork for **scalable blood management**; today, RSEs
extend that legacy by ensuring that **medical software scales efficiently,
remains interoperable, and serves all populations equitably**.  

---

## **Data, Ethics, and the Fight for Equity**  

Dr. Drew's work was not just scientific—it was deeply political. During World
War II, he **opposed the segregation of blood donations by race**, challenging
racist policies that had **no scientific basis** but persisted due to
structural discrimination. His advocacy for **equitable healthcare access**
remains just as relevant today.  

![Photo of Charles R. Drew University Medicine and Science staff in front of a
mural of Martin Luther King Jr.]({{ site.baseurl
}}/assets/img/post-2025-02-25/0_-tpZaUbjb9-bF42T.jpg "Charles R. Drew
University of Medicine & Science"){: style="display: block; margin: auto;
max-width: 600px;" }

In research software engineering, we face **similar ethical challenges**:  

- **Bias in Medical AI:** Just as Drew fought against racial segregation in
  blood banking, RSEs today must address **bias in healthcare data models**,
  ensuring that **AI-driven diagnostics do not reinforce racial disparities**.  
- **Data Security & Patient Rights:** Drew fought for **equitable access to
  life-saving blood**—today, RSEs work to ensure that **healthcare data remains
  secure, private, and ethically managed**, particularly for marginalized
  communities.  
- **Open Science & Accessibility:** The principles of **open-source medical
  informatics** align with Drew's vision of **universal access to life-saving
  resources**. Just as blood banks were designed for **public good**, modern
  research software should strive for **openness, accessibility, and
  fairness**.  

His fight for **scientific integrity and racial justice in medicine** is echoed
in today's discussions about **algorithmic bias, data transparency, and ethical
AI in healthcare**.  

---

## **The Path Forward: Recognizing Computational Contributions in Healthcare**  

Dr. Charles Drew was a scientist, an innovator, and a systems thinker. His work
transcended medicine—it was about **infrastructure, scalability, and ensuring
life-saving resources were accessible to all**.  

For research software engineers, his story is a **reminder that our work is not
just technical—it is deeply human**. The software we build in **medical
informatics, epidemiology, and health data management** directly impacts lives,
just as Drew's innovations in blood banking did.  

As we honor his legacy, we must also push for **greater recognition of RSEs in
medical research**. Just as blood banks were once invisible until Drew's work
brought them into public consciousness, **research software is often unseen—but
it is essential**.  

It is time to **recognize, credit, and support the engineers who build the
digital infrastructure of modern medicine**.  

---

## **Join the Conversation**  

Dr. Charles Drew's work in blood banking revolutionized medicine. Today,
**research software engineers** continue his legacy by building the
**computational infrastructure that powers modern healthcare**.  

Throughout **Black History Month**, we will continue highlighting the
contributions of Black scientists, mathematicians, and engineers who have
shaped **computational science and medical research**.  

Next, we'll explore Brian Fox's creation of **Bash (the Bourne Again Shell)**
and how it's foundational to open-source computing, automation, and
scripting - core aspects of research software engineering.  

**How can we ensure that research software engineers in healthcare are valued
and recognized?** Share your thoughts, follow along on Medium, and join the
**US-RSE community** to continue the conversation.  

Share your thoughts, follow along on [Medium](https://medium.com/@cdcore), and
[join the **US-RSE community**]({{baseurl}}/join) to continue the conversation.  
