---
layout: post
title: "US-RSE Celebrates Black History Month"
tags: [dei, black-history]
author: Cordero Core
date: 2025-01-31
---

[*Originally post on
Medium*](https://medium.com/@cdcore/a-philip-randolph-the-brotherhood-of-sleeping-car-porters-and-the-invisible-labor-of-research-6546aa5716fb)

![A. Phillip Randolph]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/bhm-2025-randolph.png "A.
Phillip Randolph in front of the Lincoln Memorial"){: width="400" }

### A. Philip Randolph, The Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, and the Invisible Labor of Research Software Engineers

In 1925, A. Philip Randolph took on a challenge that many deemed
impossible - organizing Black railroad porters into a union that would demand
fair wages, humane working conditions, and respect. The Brotherhood of Sleeping
Car Porters and Maids became the first Black-led union to receive a charter
from the American Federation of Labor, marking a pivotal moment in American
labor history. Randolph understood something profound: labor, especially Black
labor, was often unseen, undervalued, and dismissed. But through organization
and collective action, the invisible could be made visible.

Nearly a century later, a different kind of labor remains invisible - the work
of research software engineers (RSEs). They build the code that powers modern
scientific discovery, yet many find themselves in an ambiguous space within
academia and research institutions. Their contributions are fundamental, but
their labor often goes unrecognized in publications, funding structures, and
career pathways. This is not a coincidence. It is part of a larger historical
pattern.

---

### The Unseen Hands that Move the World

The sleeping car porters were integral to the expansion of American rail
travel. They worked long hours under harsh conditions, often relying on tips
rather than wages. They were expected to be invisible - to perform their work
without complaint, to make passengers comfortable, and to disappear into the
background. But their impact on American society was immense.

Research software engineers may not work on railroads, but their labor carries
a similar paradox. They enable science to move forward - writing software that
models climate change, processes astronomical data, and deciphers genetic
codes. Yet, the very institutions that benefit from their labor often fail to
formally recognize them. Many RSEs are classified as temporary workers,
postdocs, or "other support staff," despite their indispensable role in
research.

Randolph understood that change would not come from individual effort
alone - it required collective organization. The Brotherhood of Sleeping Car
Porters became a vehicle for economic mobility, civil rights, and structural
change. Today, the US Research Software Engineer (US-RSE) community is doing
similar work, advocating for the formal recognition of RSEs in academia and
pushing for career paths that respect the reality of their contributions.

---

### The Power of Naming and Recognition

One of Randolph's greatest victories was securing the term "Brotherhood" in the
name of the union. To be recognized as part of an organized workforce rather
than just "servants" was revolutionary. Naming something - calling it what it
is - is an act of power.

![Railroad workers]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/bhm-2025-randolph-2.png
"Photo of two rows of railroad workers")

In research, the term Research Software Engineer did not exist in widespread
use until the past decade. Before that, individuals who wrote software for
research were often called "computational scientists," "programmers," or simply
"support staff." The adoption of RSE as a professional title mirrors the
struggle of the porters: to be named is to be seen. To be seen is to demand
recognition.

For many RSEs, their work is not just a technical function - it is a form of
advocacy. They fight for open-source software, for better funding models, for
institutional recognition. Just as the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters laid
the groundwork for Black labor organizing, today's RSEs are building the
foundation for future generations of software engineers in research.

---

### Labor is Political

Randolph understood that labor and civil rights were inseparable. He was not
just organizing workers - he was challenging the racial and economic systems
that shaped their exploitation. His work directly contributed to the broader
Black freedom struggle, including the 1963 March on Washington, which he
co-organized.

The fight for recognition in research may seem different, but it is no less
political. It is about who gets to claim credit for discovery, who receives
funding, and who has the stability to build long-term careers in science. Many
RSEs, particularly those from underrepresented backgrounds, face additional
barriers in these spaces. Their work is essential, yet they often find
themselves excluded from the power structures that shape research priorities.

Randolph did not accept invisibility as fate. Neither should research software
engineers.

---

### The Path Forward

As we mark the 100th anniversary of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters and
Maids, it is worth reflecting on what labor advocacy means today. RSEs, like
the porters before them, are shaping the future through unseen, undervalued
labor. Their work is critical, their contributions are real, and their fight
for recognition is just beginning.

![Black History Month Logo]({{ site.baseurl
}}/assets/img/bhm-2025-randolph-3.png "Celebrating the Past, Looking Toward the
Future, Black History Month")

Randolph believed in the power of organizing, in the necessity of solidarity.
The US-RSE community stands as a modern parallel - advocating for fair labor
practices, recognition, and inclusion. The lesson from history is clear: no
labor is truly invisible unless we allow it to be.

If research software engineers continue to build, organize, and demand
recognition, they - like Randolph and the Brotherhood - will shape a future
where their labor is seen, valued, and honored.

---

Stay tuned, share your thoughts, and be part of the conversation. How has
invisible labor shaped your field? Let's make history visible - together.

Join us on Slack in the
[`#dei-discussion`](https://usrse.slack.com/archives/C01C8CJQ7AP) channel.
