---
layout: post
title: "Gladys West, Mathematical Models of the Earth, and the Code That Shapes Our World"
tags: [dei, black-history]
author: Cordero Core
---

US-RSE's [DEI working group (DEI-WG)](https://us-rse.org/wg/dei/) is proud to
help US-RSE celebrate and participate in Black History Month. Each week during
Black History Month, the US-RSE will spotlight Black/African Americans who have
been involved in computing, science, engineering, and/or math, and have
inspired our members through their accomplishments in their careers and their
personal stories.

[*Originally posted on
Medium*](https://medium.com/@cdcore/gladys-west-mathematical-models-of-the-earth-and-the-code-that-shapes-our-world-cf25b1702d56)

![Gladys West and Sam Smith look over data from the Global Positioning System,
which West helped develop at the Naval Proving Ground in Dahlgren, Va., March
16, 1985.]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/post-2025-02-19/0_P0wkzR-Jl25S_M42.jpg
"Gladys West and Sam Smith look over data from the Global Positioning System,
which West helped develop at the Naval Proving Ground in Dahlgren, Va., March
16, 1985."){: style="display: block; margin: auto; max-width: 600px;" }

In the mid-20th century, **Dr. Gladys West** sat in a small office at the Naval
Surface Warfare Center, crunching numbers that would eventually revolutionize
the world. Through painstaking **mathematical modeling and early computer
programming, she helped define the precise shape of the Earth—a crucial
advancement in the development of satellite geodesy**.  

Her work, largely unknown to the public for decades, became a foundational
pillar for the **Global Positioning System (GPS)**. Today, GPS is embedded in
nearly every aspect of modern life: navigation, telecommunications, disaster
response, and even climate science. But behind this technological marvel was
the labor of a Black woman mathematician, pushing the boundaries of
computational modeling in an era when both her race and gender made such
contributions all the more extraordinary.  

Dr. West's story is one of precision, persistence, and a relentless pursuit of
accuracy—qualities deeply familiar to **research software engineers (RSEs)**,
who work in the shadows of scientific progress, ensuring that computational
models are reliable, scalable, and impactful.  

---

## Building a Model of the Earth, One Equation at a Time

Dr. West began her career in the 1950s, a time when **human
computers**—mathematicians who manually performed calculations—were vital to
scientific and military advancements. She was recruited to the U.S. Navy's
**Dahlgren Laboratory**, where she specialized in **orbital mechanics and
satellite geodesy**.  

Her critical insight was that the **Earth is not a perfect sphere but an
ellipsoid with irregularities**. These irregularities affect everything from
satellite motion to gravitational forces, meaning that any accurate positioning
system had to account for them. Using **Fortran-based computational models**,
she and her team processed vast amounts of satellite data, refining the
**mathematical representation of Earth's shape**.  

![Cover of report from June 1986, Data Processing System Specifications for the
Geosat Satellite Radar Altimeter]({{ site.baseurl
}}/assets/img/post-2025-02-19/0_5AvyTMNcKD_4yXio.jpg "West’s publication.
Source: Defense Technical Information Center"){: style="display: block; margin:
auto; max-width: 600px;" }

This work culminated in a **geoid model**—a high-resolution map of the Earth's
gravitational field that became the foundation for GPS accuracy. Without it,
satellite-based navigation as we know it would not exist.  

For RSEs, this resonates deeply. Just as Dr. West ensured GPS calculations were
precise and reliable, today's RSEs build and maintain the computational models
that underlie climate research, bioinformatics, astrophysics, and countless
other scientific disciplines. **The accuracy of our models determines the
accuracy of our understanding.**  

---

## The Hidden Labor Behind Scientific Discovery

Dr. West's contributions remained largely unrecognized for much of her career.
She was a **Black woman in a field dominated by white men**, working in a time
when computational science was still emerging as its own discipline. Her story
mirrors that of many RSEs today, whose work often **falls between the cracks of
scientific recognition**—not quite mathematicians, not quite software
engineers, yet integral to the progress of both fields.  

Research software engineers write code that powers simulations, develops
machine learning pipelines, and processes enormous datasets. However, their
labor is often considered **support work** rather than primary scientific
contribution. **Dr. West's experience reminds us of the necessity of
recognizing and valuing this labor.**  

When we look at the evolution of computational sciences, we must ask: **Who
gets credit? Who gets visibility? Who shapes our scientific legacy?**  

---

## Code That Moves the World

Dr. West's work is a testament to the power of **computational rigor**. She
meticulously refined algorithms and data models to reduce errors in GPS
calculations—an early form of **software engineering for scientific accuracy**.  

![West smiling at her desk in front of many binders, with a figure of a
satellite overlaid .]({{ site.baseurl
}}/assets/img/post-2025-02-19/0_4E0MZlJcwJK6FEF9.png "Gladys at her desk."){:
style="display: block; margin: auto; max-width: 600px;" }

Her story aligns with the **principles that define research software
engineering** today:  

- **Reproducibility:** Mathematical models must be **validated, iterated, and
  improved** over time.  
- **Collaboration:** Just as she worked within a broader research ecosystem,
  modern RSEs **partner with scientists** to translate theory into code.  
- **Precision:** Small errors in satellite geodesy can mean **kilometer-scale
  inaccuracies** in GPS; the same is true in computational science, where
  coding errors can skew entire research outcomes.  

Dr. West's legacy is embedded in **every GPS calculation made today**—in every
turn-by-turn direction, in every precision-guided rescue mission, in every
agricultural yield optimization system. Her work is proof that **software
engineering and scientific modeling are inseparable**.  

---

## The Path Forward: Recognizing Computational Scientists and RSEs

Dr. West's story did not remain hidden forever. In **2018, she was formally
inducted into the Air Force Space and Missile Pioneers Hall of Fame**, a
long-overdue recognition of her contributions.  

For research software engineers, her journey is both an inspiration and a call
to action. **Recognition for computational contributions in science is still an
ongoing fight.** RSEs must be cited in research papers, included in funding
structures, and integrated into **formal career paths** within academia and
industry.  

The next time you open a maps app or track a satellite's position, remember:
**behind every calculation is code, and behind every line of code is a
person.** Dr. Gladys West showed us that precision and perseverance can change
the world.  

---

## Join the Conversation

Gladys West's story is just one of many. Throughout **Black History Month**,
we'll continue to highlight the contributions of Black scientists,
mathematicians, and engineers who have shaped computational science and
research software.  

Next, we'll explore Charles R. Drew's pioneering work in **blood banking,
transfusion medicine, and medical informatics.**  

**How do we ensure that the labor behind research software is recognized?**

Share your thoughts, follow along on [Medium](https://medium.com/@cdcore), and
[join the **US-RSE community**]({{baseurl}}/join) to continue the conversation.  
